Restrictions (#3323)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/3323-restrictions.md

}
```

then the invariant would be violated, as there are only 24 hours in a day (numbered 0–23). Given
that the invariant is not enforced by the type system, it cannot be enforced at all in this case. As
a result, we have no choice but to disallow `struct` expressions for types with `mut`-restricted
fields, in scopes where any fields are `mut`-restricted. This applies even when
[functional update syntax][fru-syntax] is used, as invariants can rely on the value of other fields.

[fru-syntax]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/expressions/struct-expr.html#functional-update-syntax

Note that despite the name, `struct` expressions are not limited to `struct`s. They are used to
initialize `enum` variants and `union`s as well. For `enum`s and `union`s, this restriction only
applies to the specific variant being constructed. For example, the following is allowed:

```rust
pub enum Foo {
    Alpha { mut(crate) x: u8 },
    Beta { y: u8 },
}

// In another crate:
Foo::Beta { y: 5 };
```

In this example, `Foo::Alpha { x: 5 }` is allowed when it is in the same crate as `Foo`. This is
because `x` is not restricted within this scope, so the field can be freely mutated. Because of

> this, the previous concern about upholding variants is not applicable.

Reviewer: This might be a typo?

```suggestion
this, the previous concern about upholding invariants is not applicable.
```

are used.

## "Mutable use" in the compiler

The concept of a "mutable use" [already exists][mutating use method] within the compiler. This
catches all situations that are relevant here, including `ptr::addr_of_mut!`, `&mut`, and direct
assignment to a field, while excluding interior mutability. As such, formal semantics of what
constitutes a "mutable use" are not stated here.

[mutating use method]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_middle/mir/visit/enum.PlaceContext.html#method.is_mutating_use

## Interaction with `trait` aliases

Trait aliases cannot be implemented. As such, there is no concern about compatibility between the
`impl` restriction and `trait` aliases.

# Drawbacks

- Additional syntax for macros to handle

# Alternatives

- `impl` and `mut` restrictions could be attributes, similar to `#[non_exhaustive]`.
  - The proposed syntax could by syntactic sugar for these attributes.
- Visibility could be altered to accept restrictions as a type of parameter, such as
  `pub(crate, mut = self)`. This does not work because restrictions are not permitted everywhere

>   visibility is.

Reviewer 2: I'm not a huge fan of this alternative, but it *could* work, just make it an error to use a restriction in a visability modifier in some places (yeah, it's not awesome, but it would work, I think).

Author: That just needlessly pushes the error farther into the compilation process, no?

Reviewer 2: Sure, I don't deny there are downsides, but this is just input into a trade-off decision, it doesn't mean that this approach "does not work".

Author: I'll update the text.

## Interaction with `trait` aliases

Trait aliases cannot be implemented. As such, there is no concern about compatibility between the
`impl` restriction and `trait` aliases.

# Drawbacks

- Additional syntax for macros to handle
- More syntax to learn
- While unambiguous to parse, `trait impl(crate) Foo` could be confusing due to its similarity to
  `impl Foo`.

# Alternatives

- `impl` and `mut` restrictions could be attributes, similar to `#[non_exhaustive]`.
  - The proposed syntax could by syntactic sugar for these attributes.
- Visibility could be altered to accept restrictions as a type of parameter, such as
  `pub(crate, mut = self)`. This is not ideal because restrictions are not permitted everywhere
  visibility is. As a result, any errors would have to occur later in the compilation process than
  they would be with the proposed syntax. It would also mean macro authors would be unable to accept
  only syntax that would be valid in a given context. Further, some positions such as `enum`
  variants do not semantically accept a visibility, while they do accept a restriction.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The current syntax prioritizes orthogonality, separating the `mut`/`impl` keyword from the scope restriction. This produces verbose syntax. Many users may want similar restrictions. Could we provide a simpler, nicer syntax if we provided less capabilities? Would a new keyword or two help? We could choose a syntax with more limited flexibility but less verbosity and more simplicity. For instance, `sealed` or `readonly`.

```

(Modulo word wrap.)

Not necessarily advocating for this, but it seems like an alternative worth serious consideration.

Reviewer 3: To look at it a different way: suppose we were designing Rust syntax anew, knowing we wanted this feature. What would it look like? Probably like fields being readonly by default unless marked otherwise, and traits being sealed by default unless marked otherwise.

referred to as a "sealed trait", and is frequently simulated by using a public trait in a private or
restricted module.

Similarly, a field being visible currently implies that you are able to mutate it. Just as with
traits being able to be implemented anywhere, this is not always what is wanted. The semantic
correctness of a field may depend on the value of other fields, for example. This means that making
fields public, while acceptable for read access, is not acceptable for write access. Limiting the
ability to mutate a field to a certain scope is desirable in these situations, while still allowing
read access everywhere else.

# Guide-level explanation

**Restrictions** limit what you are allowed to do with a type. In this sense, visibility is a
restriction! The compiler stops you from using a private type, after all. `#[non_exhaustive]` is
also a restriction, as it requires you to have a wildcard arm in a `match` expression. Both of these
are used on a daily basis by countless Rust programmers.

Restrictions are a powerful tool because the compiler stops you from doing something you are not

> allowed to do. If you violate a restriction by using trickery, such as transmuting a type, the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
allowed to do. If you violate a restriction by using unsafe trickery, such as transmuting a type, the
```

restricted, and the compiler can emit better diagnostics when someone tries to implement `Foo`.
Another benefit is that it is no longer possible to accidentally implement `Sealed` for a type but
not `Foo`. This is a very easy mistake to make, and it is difficult to notice. With the new syntax,
you will only have one trait to worry about.

## `mut`-restricted fields

Have you ever wanted to have read-only fields in Rust? C++, C#, Java, TypeScript, Kotlin, and Swift
all have them in some form or another! In Rust, it is feasible to go one step further and have
fields that are only mutable within a certain module. Said another way, you can mutate it but other
people cannot. This is useful for a number of reasons. For example, you may have a `struct` whose
values are always semantically in a given range. This occurs in `time`:

```rust
pub struct Time {
    hour: u8,
    minute: u8,
    second: u8,
    nanosecond: u32,
}
```

The author of `time` would love to have these fields public. However, they do not want users to be
able to change the values, as that would violate the invariants of the type. As a result they

> currently have to keep the fields private and write getters. What if, instead, they could add

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
currently have to keep the fields private and write "getter" methods. What if, instead, they could add
```

is that the mutation occurs on the line where the reference is taken. This is the choice that makes
the most sense from the perspective of the user.

```rust
fn foo<T>(x: &mut T, value: T) {
    if random() {
        *x = value;
    }
}

let mut x = 5;
foo(&mut x, 6);
```

Here, `x` is mutably borrowed on the final line, but the value is changed in memory inside the `if`
block. You might say, logically, that the mutation occurs inside the `if` block. But if we use this
definition, then we could not know about the mutation until after monomorphization. Errors generated
post-monomorphization are generally frowned upon, as it happens quite late in the compilation
process. But consider this: what if `x` is not actually mutated within the body of `foo`? Now we
have a window into what actually happens inside the function, and it is something that is not stated
in the function signature. Not great. In this specific example, it is not even deterministic!
Because of this, it is quite literally impossible to know whether `x` is actually mutated inside a
given function. As a result we have no choice: the error _must_ be generated at the point where the

> reference is taken.

Reviewer 3: Excellent analysis, thank you for including this reasoning.

Okay, we solved that problem. We know that the mutable use happens on the final line. But what about
this?

```rust
let x = Cell::new(5);
x.set(6);
```

> Rust, as you may know, has [interior mutability]. This is what we are using here. `x` is not

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Rust has [interior mutability], which is what we are using here. `x` is not
```

> declared mutable, and it does not need to be. This is the beauty of interior mutability. But it

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
declared mutable, and it does not need to be. This is the purpose of interior mutability, by definition. But it
```

introduces a key question: where is the mutation? The answer is that it is **not** a mutation for
the purposes of this restriction. This is not because the value is not changed: it is. Rather, it is
the logical result of the semantics of `mut` restrictions and where errors must occur (as described
after the previous example). If errors are emitted at the point where the mutable reference is
created, then there can be no such error here, as no mutable reference is ever created. `Cell::set`

> is a method that takes `&self`, not `&mut self`. Surely we can make interior mutability a special
> case, right? No; the only way to work around this is to make any reference to a type with interior
> mutability considered a mutation. Consequently, you could never have a reference to a type

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is a method that takes `&self`, not `&mut self`. Interior mutability is not a special-case; the only way to work around this would be to make even non-mutable references to a type with interior
mutability considered a mutation. Consequently, you could never have a reference to a type
```

containing a `mut`-restricted, interior-mutable field. This is unacceptable, so interior mutability

> cannot be considered a mutation for the purposes of this restriction.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
cannot be considered a mutation for the purposes of this restriction. Interfaces that wish to restrict even *interior* mutability of a field should avoid exposing it as public with private mutability.
```

[interior mutability]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/interior-mutability.html

### `struct` expressions are not allowed

Given that the most common use for for `mut`-restricted fields is to ensure an invariant, it is
important that the invariant be enforced. Consider the previous definition of `Time`. If you could
write

```rust
Time {
    hour: 32,
    minute: 0,
    second: 0,
    nanosecond: 0,
}
```

then the invariant would be violated, as there are only 24 hours in a day (numbered 0–23). Given
that the invariant is not enforced by the type system, it cannot be enforced at all in this case. As

> a result, we have no choice but to disallow `struct` expressions for types with `mut`-restricted
> fields. This applies even when [functional update syntax][fru-syntax] is used, as invariants can

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
a result, we have no choice but to disallow `struct` expressions for types with `mut`-restricted
fields, in scopes where any fields are read-only. This applies even when [functional update syntax][fru-syntax] is used, as invariants can
```

You cover this below, but I think it would help to mention it here.

rely on the value of other fields.

[fru-syntax]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/expressions/struct-expr.html#functional-update-syntax

Note that despite the name, `struct` expressions are not limited to `struct`s. They are used to
initialize `enum` variants and `union`s as well. For `enum`s and `union`s, this restriction only
applies to the specific variant being constructed. For example, the following is allowed:

```rust
pub enum Foo {
    Alpha { mut(crate) x: u8 },
    Beta { y: u8 },
}

// In another crate:
Foo::Beta { y: 5 };
```

> In this example, `Foo::Alpha { x: 5 }` is allowed when it is in the same crate as `Foo`. This is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this example, `Foo::Alpha { x: 5 }` would only be allowed within the same crate as `Foo`. This is
```

because `x` is not restricted within this scope, so the field can be freely mutated. Because of
this, the previous concern about upholding variants is not applicable.

## `mod` as a restriction scope

`pub` can be restricted in a few ways. The most common is `pub(crate)`, which restricts visibility
to the current crate. However, there are other ways to restrict visibility. You can also use
`pub(super)` to restrict visibility to the parent module, and `pub(in path)` to restrict visibility
to `path`, as long as that path is an ancestor of the location it is used. There is one additional
case you have likely never encountered: `pub(self)`. The reason you have likely never seen this

> before is that it is completely useless. Why? `pub(self)` is identical to private, which is the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
before is that it is redundant: `pub(self)` is identical to private, which is the
```

It's redundant, but it isn't *completely* useless: I've seen uses for it in macros, for instance.

default visibility.

> While `pub(self)` should never be written in ordinary code, `impl(self)` and `mut(self)` are quite

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While `pub(self)` should never be needed in most code, `impl(self)` and `mut(self)` are quite
```

> different. As the default restriction is unrestricted implementation and unrestricted mutation, it

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
different. As no restrictions apply by default (anything visible can be implemented/mutated), it
```

is more than likely that `impl(self)` and `mut(self)` will be quite common. During previous
discussions about syntax, the unclear meaning of `impl(self)` and `mut(self)` was brought up. Syntax
should have a clear meaning, and `impl(self)` and `mut(self)` are not clear. While they should be
allowed for consistency with `pub(self)`, an alternative was needed with the same behavior.
`impl(mod)` and `mut(mod)` should have a sufficiently clear meaning: implementing the trait and
mutating the field are restricted to the current module. `impl(in mod)` and `mut(in mod)` are
accepted as well. The behavior of `impl(mod)` is identical to `impl(self)`; likewise for `mut(mod)`
and `mut(self)`.

> For consistency with the new restriction syntax, `pub(mod)` and `pub(in mod)` are also allowed.

Reviewer 3: I don't think `impl(self)` or `mut(self)` are at all unclear. There was much discussion about making them *shorter*, since they're likely to be one of the most common cases. And there was discussion about whether we could somehow change their defaults (which we can't easily do). But those issues aside, `mut(self)` and `impl(self)` seem reasonably clear. Sufficiently so that I don't think we should add `mod` or `in mod`.

# Reference-level explanation

## Syntax

Using the syntax from [the reference for `struct`s][struct syntax], the change needed to support
`mut` restrictions is quite small.

[struct syntax]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/items/structs.html

```diff
StructField :
   OuterAttribute*
   Visibility?
+  MutRestriction?
   IDENTIFIER : Type

TupleField :
   OuterAttribute*
   Visibility?
+  MutRestriction?
   Type

+MutRestriction :

> +     mut

Reviewer 4: what `mut` without any parenthesis does is not well explained above.

Reviewer 3: I had the same question.

+   | mut ( crate )
+   | mut ( self )

> +   | mut ( mod )

Reviewer 3: As above, I don't think we should add this.

+   | mut ( super )
+   | mut ( in SimplePath )

> +   | mut ( in mod )

Reviewer 4: imho `mut(in mod)` is redundant with `mut(mod)` and is not justified by the existing `pub(in <path>)`. `pub(in self)` works only because `self` is a path, `mod` is not (unless you're proposing `mod` should become a path?)

Reviewer 3: I don't think we should add this, or `mod`, at all.

```

Trait definitions need a similar change to the [syntax for `trait`s][trait syntax] to accommodate
`impl` restrictions.

[trait syntax]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/items/traits.html

```diff
Trait :
   unsafe?
+  ImplRestriction?
   trait IDENTIFIER
   GenericParams? ( : TypeParamBounds? )? WhereClause? {
     InnerAttribute*
     AssociatedItem*
   }

+ImplRestriction :
+     impl
+   | impl ( crate )
+   | impl ( self )
+   | impl ( mod )
+   | impl ( super )
+   | impl ( in SimplePath )
+   | impl ( in mod )
```

Essentially, `mut` and `impl` have the same syntax as `pub`, just with a different keyword.

> Finally, a minor change is needed to the syntax for visibility to permit `pub(mod)`.
> 
> ```diff
> Visibility :
>      pub
>    | pub ( crate )
>    | pub ( self )
> +  | pub ( mod )
>    | pub ( super )
>    | pub ( in SimplePath )
> +  | pub ( in mod )
> ```
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, a minor change is needed to the syntax for visibility to permit `pub(mod)`.

```diff
Visibility :
     pub
   | pub ( crate )
   | pub ( self )
+  | pub ( mod )
   | pub ( super )
   | pub ( in SimplePath )
+  | pub ( in mod )
```

I think if we want to consider doing this at all, it should be a completely separate RFC.
```

## Behavior

The current behavior of `pub` is that `pub` makes something visible within the declared scope. If no
scope is declared (such that it is just `pub`), then the item is visible everywhere. This behavior
is preserved for `impl` and `mut`. When a restriction is used, the behavior is allowed only within
the declared scope. When the keyword is used alone, the behavior is allowed everywhere. While in
most cases the default visibility is private, `pub` is default in some cases, namely `enum`
variants, `enum` fields, and `trait` items. `impl` and `mut` will have a consistent default: when
omitted entirely, the scope is inherited from `pub`. This is both what is most convenient and is

> what is required for backwards compatibility with existing code.

Reviewer 3: This seems really confusing, in addition to being redundant. In particular, `pub impl Trait { ... }` seems really easy to confuse with `impl Trait for ...`.

This would become even *more* confusing if, in the future, we support trait implementations with limited visibility (`pub(crate) impl Trait for Type { ... }`).

I think we shouldn't support bare `impl` or `mut` at all. Is there some specific use case that motivates them, where they wouldn't be redundant?

the designated path. Any mutable use of the field outside the scope is a compile error. Further, a
`struct`, `union`, or `enum` variant containing fields with an associated `MutRestriction` may not
be constructed with `struct` expressions unless all fields are unrestricted in the present scope.
This is the case even if the field is not directly declared, such as when functional record updates
are used.

## "Mutable use" in the compiler

The concept of a "mutable use" [already exists][mutating use method] within the compiler. This
catches all situations that are relevant here, including `ptr::addr_of_mut!`, `&mut`, and direct
assignment to a field, while excluding interior mutability. As such, formal semantics of what
constitutes a "mutable use" are not stated here.

[mutating use method]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nightly-rustc/rustc_middle/mir/visit/enum.PlaceContext.html#method.is_mutating_use

## Interaction with `trait` aliases

Trait aliases cannot be implemented. As such, there is no concern about compatibility between the
`impl` restriction and `trait` aliases.

# Drawbacks

> - Additional syntax for macros to handle

Reviewer 3: You need to cover how precisely macros *should* handle it. I think this needs at least one new matcher, possibly a few. First, we definitely need a matcher for "what goes inside the parentheses after `mut` or `impl`", matching `self`, `crate`, `super`, `in path`, etc. And second, we *might* want a convenient matcher for "everything that can go before the name in a field" and "everything that can go before the name in a trait declaration", which types may use in place of "vis" for convenience.

As an alternative, I wonder if it *might* make sense to have these desugar to an attribute, and then macros that match and preserve attributes will Just Work. That would be a larger change, though.

Reviewer 3: You also need a second discussion about macros, separate from matching this syntax: is mutability/implementability determined by span or by expansion site?

Visibility currently uses expansion site, not span. However, span-based visibility would be *incredibly* valuable for many users (to avoid having to export a `doc(hidden)` type for use by a macro that users can technically use without the macro). Taking that into account, I wonder if we might *want* span-based mutability and span-based implementability.

# Alternatives

> - `impl` and `mut` restrictions could be attributes, similar to `#[non_exhaustive]`.

Reviewer 3: Per above, they could also desugar to attributes.

# Prior art

- The [`readonly` crate] simulates immutable fields outside of the defining module. Types with this
  attribute cannot define `Deref`, which can be limiting. Additionally, it applies to all fields and
  within the defining crate. The advantages of native read-only fields relating to borrow checking
  also do not apply when using this crate.
- The ability to restrict implementations of a trait can be simulated by a public trait in a private
  module. This has the disadvantage that the trait is no longer nameable by external users,
  preventing its use as a generic bound. Current diagnostics, while technically correct, are
  unhelpful to downstream users.

> - Various other languages have read-only fields, including C++, C#, Java, TypeScript, Kotlin, and
>   Swift.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Various other languages have read-only fields, including C++, C#, Java, TypeScript, Kotlin, and
  Swift.
- Users of many languages, including Rust, regularly implement read-only fields by providing a getter without a setter, demonstrating a need for this.
```

(modulo word-wrap)

# Unresolved questions

- Should unrestricted "restrictions" be allowed to be explicitly stated, or should this be banned?
  If allowed, should it be a warning?
  - Both `impl` and `mut` make no sense to have unrestricted, as that is the default behavior. An
    "unnecessary" restriction lint that is warn-by-default would be ideal. This would allow macros

>     to emit more flexible syntax. This warning could also be used for `pub(self)`.

Reviewer 3: I see; macros do seem like the *one* case where this might potentially be useful.

Reviewer 5: Though for macros it might be more useful to allow `impl()` and `mut()` maybe?

- How will restrictions work with `macro_rules!` matchers? There is currently a `vis` matcher, but
  it is likely unwise to add a new matcher for each restriction. Should the new syntax be included
  as part of the `vis` matcher? If so, it is important to note that restrictions are not the same
  everywhere, if they are valid at all.
  - Suggestions welcome!
- What is the interaction between stability and restrictions?
  - Suggestion: Visibility is an inherent part of the item; restrictions should be as well. Metadata
    can be added in the future indicating when an item had its restriction lifted, if applicable.

>     The design for this is left to the language team as necessary.

Author: Would you prefer this point be removed entirely?

>     The design for this is left to the language team as necessary.

Reviewer 3: No, I think it should stay. I just think it should explicitly state that since stability markers are unstable this design doesn't need settling at this time.

# Future possibilities

> - Sealed/exhaustive traits could happen in the future. This has the ability to impact coherence,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Explicitly sealed/exhaustive traits could happen in the future. This has the ability to impact coherence,
```

  such that other crates could rely on the fact that the list of implementations is exhaustive. As
  traits would default to unsealed, this does not have be decided now.
- Trait items could gain proper visibility and/or restrictions of their own. This would allow

>   private and/or defaulted trait items that cannot be overridden.

Reviewer 6: This is a great step towards sealed/exhaustive traits ❤️ Hence, I think restrictions should have as strong stability guarantees as visibility does now.

- Set-once fields could potentially occur in the future. Functionally, this would be "true"
  read-only fields, in that they can be constructed but never mutated. They are not included in this

>   proposal as the use case is nor clear, nor is there an immediately obvious syntax to support this.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  proposal as the use case is nor clear, nor is there an immediately obvious syntax to support this.
- We could change defaults in a future edition, such as to make `pub field: Type` be only mutable within the module rather than mutable everywhere. This seems unlikely, as this would be an incredibly disruptive change, and the benefits would have to be commensurately high.
```

  `impl Foo`.

# Alternatives

- `impl` and `mut` restrictions could be attributes, similar to `#[non_exhaustive]`.
  - The proposed syntax could by syntactic sugar for these attributes.
- Visibility could be altered to accept restrictions as a type of parameter, such as
  `pub(crate, mut = self)`. This is not ideal because restrictions are not permitted everywhere
  visibility is. As a result, any errors would have to occur later in the compilation process than
  they would be with the proposed syntax. It would also mean macro authors would be unable to accept
  only syntax that would be valid in a given context. Further, some positions such as `enum`
  variants do not semantically accept a visibility, while they do accept a restriction.

# Prior art

- The [`readonly` crate] simulates immutable fields outside of the defining module. Types with this
  attribute cannot define `Deref`, which can be limiting. Additionally, it applies to all fields and
  within the defining crate. The advantages of native read-only fields relating to borrow checking
  also do not apply when using this crate.
- The `derive-getters` and `getset` crates are derive macros that are used to generate getter

>   methods. The latter also has the ability to derive getters. This demonstrates the usefulness of

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  methods. The latter also has the ability to derive setters. This demonstrates the usefulness of
```

Author: Always typos! Thanks.
